---
layout: post
category : blog
tags : [dnd, 5e, blog]
comments: false
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Having not been a huge fan of Dungeons and Dragons 4th Edition, I
still have a lot of faith in what Mike Mearls and the folks at Wizards
of the Coast are doing.  From what I've seen
[\[1\]](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=Yoa_xQTya8Y)
Dungeons and Dragons 5th Edition sounds like the perfect amalgamation
of the prior editions (what's not to love about that) but there's a
few things I'm worried about.

The impetus behind the new edition is creating what Jeremy Crawford,
WoTC Lead Rules Editor, calls a kernel or a base set of rules which
all of the minutiae can be stacked on top of. Another important aspect
of the kernel is making the classes more balanced
[\[2\]](http://wizards.com/dnd/Article.aspx?x=dnd/4ll/20120430) (woo!)
such that fighters aren't dominated by wizards. WoTC will be releasing
modules which enhance different elements of the game on top of the
kernel to allow for dungeon masters and players with different styles
to get the most out of their game.

In their PAX East 2012 Panel
[\[1\]](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=Yoa_xQTya8Y),
Mike and Jeremy explain the large amount of attention they're giving
to the game being playable in all of the different campaign settings
that everyone has come to love throughout the years (Ravenloft,
Dragonlance, Greyhawk etc.). I don't think this will be too hard to
accomplish but I'm glad they're keeping these in mind -- not too many
groups stick with the core setting.

The main thing I dislike about the current edition is that there's no
System Reference Document
[\[3\]](http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=d20/article/srd35)
published via the "Open Game License
[\[4\]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Game_License) like there was
for 3.0
[\[5\]](http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/md/md20020228e) &
3.5. What this means is that WoTC is the only group who can publish
material which uses their rule set. 4th Edition would be kind of
difficult to do this with because of the watered down nature of it but
other companies like White Wolf (Sword & Sorcery), Green Ronin, or
Necromancer Games (to name a few) can't make really awesome
supplements and sell them for the current edition.

I was on the edge of my seat watching the panel, waiting for someone
to start the SRD/OGL conversation. It was brought up, which was
awesome, but Mike kind of shrugged it off by saying, "We can't really
talk about that...". I really wish they would think about this. I'm
still buying 3.0 and 3.5 edition materials
[\[6\]](http://scarn.wikia.com/wiki/Hollowfaust:_City_of_Necromancers)
published under the Sword and Sorcery umbrella and they're easily made
relevant to systems like Pathfinder but would require a lot of extra
effort to make 4th edition friendly.

[\[1\]](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=Yoa_xQTya8Y) The Future of D&D Panel at PAX East - 2012
    Mike Mearls & Jeremy Crawford

[\[2\]](http://wizards.com/dnd/Article.aspx?x=dnd/4ll/20120430)  Fighter Design Goals
    Mike Mearls

[\[3\]](http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=d20/article/srd35) Revised 3.5 System Reference Document
    Wizards of the Coast

[\[4\]](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Game_License) Open Game License
    Wikipedia

[[5]](http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/md/md20020228e) The Most Dangerous Column in Gaming
    Ryan Dancey

[\[6\]](http://scarn.wikia.com/wiki/Hollowfaust:_City_of_Necromancers) Hollowfaust: City of Necromancers
    Scarred Lands Sword and Sorcery Products
